Just a few miles outside a small town western Washington, there exists a vast network of recreational trails that redefines how we live with our forests. This is no national forest or protected park; it is a privately owned, working, industrial forest. It’s not on any map. The information on the internet is intentionally vague. Yet on any given weekend you might see hundreds of mountain bikers out there enjoying the now 70+ miles of well maintained, purpose built and well loved trails.
Even more impressive is the number of people who show up not with bikes but with shovels and saws to volunteer their time for the community-lead trail maintenance parties.There is an unwritten rule here - your “entry fee” to this trail system is to join the community in maintaining it. There are races and tours and group rides, but they’re alI free of charge, provided you’ve paid your dues in sweat. 


Signage and GPS coordinates will never be included. 
The Ride Guide is password protected.... Sharing the password will subject you to a lifetime ban.
Some people … will complain that the directions are not specific enough. What is it about “Turn left at the reddish-brown stick just past the smaller fern” that [they] don’t understand?




If it all seems very secretive, it is meant to be. Technically, this land is privately owned for the purpose of timber. The young, even aged plantations of trees, periodically clear cut, with an extensive network of gravel logging roads are in some ways unremarkable in this respect. But 20 years ago, the local cycling community saw that there was a huge untapped potential for additional value in recreation - and the private company that owned the land agreed. What began as a small ragtag group of mountain bikers carving out fun little trails in the woods has grown into an organized community of trail stewards that make it one of the finest mountain biking destinations in the pacific northwest. 
What does the timber company get in return? Most private landowners would be frightened of liability or obstruction of their operations. But through a degree of secrecy combined with careful coordination and communication with the cycling community, this land owner has largely avoided any such issues. Timber harvests still go off as scheduled and new trails get carved into the young forest a few years later. It would be nice if they could get some positive press or tax breaks for their contribution but the current system requires that private working lands need to at least put up the illusion that the land is locked away; the proverbial “No Trespassing” sign.


Races
Work parties
Impact on economy
Relationship with timber company
Liability
geology, geography, species, etc.